---
layout: narrative
title: "Capital Vol. I - 1890 Preface"
author: Karl Marx
---

* * *

[**Index -** *Capital Vol.1*](/preindex)

[**Previous:** Capital Vol. I - 1886 Preface](/prefaces/p6)

[**Next:** Capital Vol. I - Letter from Marx to Engels](/prefaces/letter)

* * *

### Capital Vol. I - 1890 Preface

* * *

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH GERMAN EDITION


The fourth edition required that I should establish
in final form, as nearly as possible, both text and footnotes. The following
brief explanation will show how I have fulfilled this task.

After again comparing the French edition and Marx's manuscript
remarks I have made some further additions to the German text from that
translation. They will be found on p. 80 (3rd edition, p. 88) [present
edition, pp. 117-18], pp. 458-60 (3rd edition, pp. 509-10) [present edition,
pp. 462-65], pp. 547-51 (3rd edition, p. 600) [present
edition, pp. 548-51], pp. 591-93 (3rd edition, p. 644) [present edition,
587-89] and p. 596 (3rd edition, p. 648) [present edition, p. 591] in Note
1.[^1] I have also followed the example of the French and English editions
by putting the long footnote on the miners into the text (3rd edition,
pp.509-15; 4th edition, pp. 461-67) [present edition, pp. 465-71]. Other
small alterations are of a purely technical nature.

Further, I have added a few more explanatory notes, especially
where changed historical conditions seemed to demand this. All these additional
notes are enclosed in square brackets and marked either with my initials
or "D. H." [^2] 

Meanwhile a complete revision of the numerous quotations had been
made necessary by the publication of the English edition. For this edition
Marx's youngest daughter, Eleanor, undertook to compare all the quotations
with their originals, so that those taken from English sources, which constitute
the vast majority, are given there not as re-translations from the German
but in the original English form. In preparing the fourth edition it was
therefore incumbent upon me to consult this text. The comparison revealed
various small inaccuracies. Page numbers wrongly indicated, due partly
to mistakes in copying from notebooks, and partly to the accumulated misprints
of three editions; misplaced quotation or omission marks, which cannot
be avoided when a mass of quotations is copied from note-book extracts;
here and there some rather unhappy translation of a word; particular passages
quoted from the old Paris notebooks of 1843-45, when Marx did not know
English and was reading English economists in French translations, so that
the double translation yielded a slightly different shade of meaning, _e.g._,
in the case of Steuart, Ure, etc., where the English text had now to be
used - and other similar instances of trifling inaccuracy or negligence.
But anyone who compares the fourth edition with the previous ones can convince
himself that all this laborious process of emendation has not produced
the smallest change in the book worth speaking of. There was only one quotation
which could not be traced - the one from Richard Jones (4th edition, p.
562, note 47). Marx probably slipped up when writing down the title of
the book. [^3] All the other quotations retain their cogency in full, or have enhanced it due to their present exact form.

Here, however, I am obliged to revert to an old story.

I know of only one case in which the accuracy of a quotation given
by Marx has been called in question. But as the issue dragged beyond his
lifetime I cannot well ignore it here.

On March 7, 1872, there appeared in the Berlin _Concordia_,
organ of the German Manufacturers' Association, an anonymous article entitled:
"How Karl Marx Quotes." It was here asserted, with an effervescence of
moral indignation and unparliamentary language, that the quotation from
Gladstone's Budget Speech of April 16, 1863 (in the _Inaugural Address_ of the International Workingmen's Association, 1864, and repeated in "Capital," Vol. I, p.
617, 4th edition; p. 671, 3rd edition) [present edition, p. 610], had been
falsified; that not a single word of the sentence: "this intoxicating
augmentation of wealth and power ... is ... entirely confined to classes of
property" was to be found in the (semi-official) stenographic report in
Hansard. "But this sentence is nowhere to be found in Gladstone's speech.
Exactly the opposite is stated there." (In bold type): "__This sentence,
both in form and substance, is a lie inserted by Marx.__" 

Marx, to whom the number of _Concordia_ was sent the following
May, answered the anonymous author in the _Volksstaat_ of June 1st.
As he could not recall which newspaper report he had used for the quotation,
he limited himself to citing, first the equivalent quotation from two English
publications, and then the report in _The Times_, according to which
Gladstone says:

"That is the state of the case as regards the wealth of this country.
I must say for one, I should look almost with apprehension and with pain
upon this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power, if it were my
belief that it was confined to classes who are in easy circumstances. This
takes no cognisance at all of the condition of the labouring population.
The augmentation I have described and which is founded, I think, upon accurate
returns, is an augmentation entirely confined to classes possessed of property." 

Thus Gladstone says here that he would be sorry if it were so,
but it _is_ so: this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power
is entirely confined to classes of property. And as to the semi-official
Hansard, Marx goes on to say: "In the version which he afterwards manipulated
[zurechtgestümpert], Mr. Gladstone was astute enough to obliterate
[wegzupfuschen] this passage, which, coming from an English Chancellor
of the Exchequer, was certainly compromising. This, by the way, is a traditional
usage in the English parliament and not an invention gotten up by little
Lasker against Bebel."

The anonymous writer gets angrier and angrier. In his answer in
_Concordia_, July 4th, he sweeps aside second-hand sources and demurely
suggests that it is the "custom" to quote parliamentary speeches from the
stenographic report; adding, however, that _The Times_ report (which
includes the "falsified" sentence) and the Hansard report (which omits
it) are "substantially in complete agreement," while _The Times_ report
likewise contains "the exact opposite to that notorious passage in the
_Inaugural Address_." This fellow carefully conceals the fact that
_The Times_ report explicitly includes that self-same "notorious passage," 
alongside of its alleged "opposite." Despite all this, however, the anonymous
one feels that he is stuck fast and that only some new dodge can save him.
Thus, whilst his article bristles, as we have just shown, with "impudent
mendacity" and is interlarded with such edifying terms of abuse as "bad
faith," "dishonesty," "lying allegation," "that spurious quotation," "impudent
mendacity," "a quotation entirely falsified," "this falsification," "simply
infamous," etc., he finds it necessary to divert the issue to another domain
and therefore promises "to explain in a second article the meaning which
we (the non-mendacious anonymous one) attribute to the content of Gladstone's
words." As if his particular opinion, of no decisive value as it is, had
anything whatever to do with the matter. This second article was printed
in _Concordia_ on July 11th.

Marx replied again in the _Volksstaat_ of August 7th now
giving also the reports of the passage in question from the _Morning
Star_ and the _Morning Advertiser_ of April 17, 1863. According
to both reports Gladstone said that he would look with apprehension, etc.,
upon this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power if he believed
it to be confined to "classes in easy circumstances." But this augmentation
_was_ in fact "entirely confined to classes possessed of property." 
So these reports too reproduced word for word the sentence alleged to have
been "lyingly inserted." Marx further established once more, by a comparison
of _The Times_ and the Hansard texts, that this sentence, which three
newspaper reports of identical content, appearing independently of one
another the next morning, proved to have been really uttered, was missing
from the Hansard report, revised according to the familiar "custom," and
that Gladstone, to use Marx's words, "had afterwards conjured it away."

In conclusion Marx stated that he had no time for further intercourse with
the anonymous one. The latter also seems to have had enough, at any
rate Marx received no further issues of _Concordia_.

With this the matter appeared to be dead and buried. True, once
or twice later on there reached us, from persons in touch with the University
of Cambridge, mysterious rumours of an unspeakable literary crime which
Marx was supposed to have committed in "Capital," but despite all investigation
nothing more definite could be learned. Then, on November 29, 1883, eight
months after Marx's death, there appeared in _The Times_ a letter
headed Trinity College, Cambridge, and signed Sedley Taylor, in which this
little man, who dabbles in the mildest sort of co-operative affairs, seizing
upon some chance pretext or other, at last enlightened us, not only concerning
those vague Cambridge rumours, but also the anonymous one in _Concordia_.

"What appears extremely singular," says the little man from Trinity
College, "is that it was reserved for _Professor Brentano_ (then of
the University of Breslau, now of that of Strassburg) to expose... the
bad faith which had manifestly dictated the citation made from Mr. Gladstone's
speech in the [Inaugural] Address. Herr Karl Marx, who ... attempted to
defend the citation, had the hardihood, in the deadly shifts to which Brentano's
masterly conduct of the attack speedily reduced him, to assert that Mr.
Gladstone had 'manipulated' the report of his speech in _The Times_
of April 17, 1863, before it appeared in Hansard, in order to 'obliterate'
a passage which 'was certainly compromising' for an English Chancellor
of the Exchequer. On Brentano's showing, by a detailed comparison of texts,
that the reports of _The Times_ and of Hansard agreed in utterly excluding
the meaning which craftily isolated quotation had put upon Mr. Gladstone's
words, Marx withdrew from further controversy under the plea of 'want of
time.'" 

So that was at the bottom of the whole business! And thus was
the anonymous campaign of Herr Brentano in _Concordia_ gloriously
reflected in the productively co-operating imagination of Cambridge. Thus
he stood, sword in hand, and thus he battled, in his "masterly conduct
of the attack," this St. George of the German Manufacturers' Association,
whilst the infernal dragon Marx, "in deadly shifts," "speedily" breathed
his last at his feet.

All this Ariostian battle scene, however, only serves to conceal
the dodges of our St. George. Here there is no longer talk of "lying insertion" 
or "falsification," but of "craftily isolated quotation." The whole issue
was shifted, and St. George and his Cambridge squire very well knew why.

Eleanor Marx replied in the monthly journal _To-day_ (February
1884), _as The Times_ refused to publish her letter. She once more
focussed the debate on the sole question at issue: had Marx "lyingly inserted" 
that sentence or not? To this Mr. Sedley Taylor answered that "the question
whether a particular sentence did or did not occur in Mr. Gladstone's speech" 
had been, in his opinion, "of very subordinate importance" in the Brentano-Marx
controversy, "compared to the issue whether the quotation in dispute was
made with the intention of conveying, or of perverting Mr. Gladstone's
meaning." He then admits _that The Times_ report contains "a verbal
contrariety"; but, if the context is rightly interpreted, _i.e.,_
in the Gladstonian Liberal sense, it shows what Mr. Gladstone _meant_
to say. (_To-day_, March, 1884.) The most comic point here is that
our little Cambridge man now insists upon quoting the speech not from Hansard,
as, according to the anonymous Brentano, it is "customary" to do, but
from _The Times_ report, which the same Brentano had characterised
as "necessarily bungling." Naturally so, for in Hansard the vexatious sentence
is missing.

Eleanor Marx had no difficulty (in the same issue of _To-day_)
in dissolving all this argumentation into thin air. Either Mr. Taylor had
read the controversy of 1872, in which case he was now making not only
"lying insertions" but also "lying" suppressions; or he had not read it
and ought to remain silent. In either case it was certain that he did not
dare to maintain for a moment the accusation of his friend Brentano that
Marx had made a "lying" addition. On the contrary, Marx, it now seems,
had not lyingly added but suppressed an important sentence. But this same
sentence is quoted on page 5 of the _Inaugural Address_, a few lines
before the alleged "lying insertion." And as to the "contrariety" in Gladstone's
speech, is it not Marx himself, who in "Capital," p. 618 (3rd edition,
p. 672), note 105 [present edition, p. 611, Note 1], refers to "the continual
crying contradictions in Gladstone's Budget speeches of 1863 and 1864"?
Only he does not presume à la Mr. Sedley Taylor to resolve them
into complacent Liberal sentiments. Eleanor Marx, in concluding her reply,
finally sums up as follows:

"Marx has not suppressed anything worth quoting, neither has he
'lyingly' added anything. But he has restored, rescued from oblivion, a
particular sentence of one of Mr. Gladstone's speeches, a sentence which
had indubitably been pronounced, but which somehow or other had found its
way - out of Hansard." 

With that Mr. Sedley Taylor too had had enough, and the result
of this whole professorial cobweb, spun out over two decades and two great
countries, is that nobody has since dared to cast any other aspersion upon
Marx's literary honesty; whilst Mr. Sedley Taylor, no doubt, will hereafter
put as little confidence in the literary war bulletins of Herr Brentano
as Herr Brentano will in the papal infallibility of Hansard.

Frederick Engels

London

June 25. 1890

* * *

## Footnotes

[^1]: In the English edition of 1887 this addition was made by Engels himself. - Ed.

[^2]: In the present edition they are put into square brackets and marked with the initials

[^3]: Marx was not mistaken in the title of the book but in the page. He put down 36 instead of 37. (See p.p. 560-61 of the present edition.) - Ed.

