---
layout: narrative
title: "Chapter 16 - Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value"
author:
part: "Part V. The Production of Absolute and of Relative Surplus-Value"
toc:
- Footnotes
---
* * *

[**Index -** *Capital Vol. 1*]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link cap1index.md %})

[**Previous:** Chapter 15 - Machinery and Modern Industry]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link _texts/ch15.md %})

[**Next:** Chapter 17 - Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link _texts/ch17.md %})

* * *

In considering the labour-process, we began (see Chapter
VII.) by treating it in the abstract, apart from its historical forms,
as a process between man and Nature. We there stated, &#8220;If we examine the
whole labour-process, from the point of view of its result, it is plain
that both the instruments and the subject of labour are means of production,
and that the labour itself is productive labour.&#8221; And in Note 2, same page,
we further added: &#8220;This method of determining, from the standpoint of the
labour-process alone, what is productive labour, is by no means directly
applicable to the case of the capitalist process of production.&#8221; We now
proceed to the further development of this subject.

So far as the labour-process is purely individual, one and the
same labourer unites in himself all the functions, that later on become
separated. When an individual appropriates natural objects for his livelihood,
no one controls him but himself. Afterwards he is controlled by others.
A single man cannot operate upon Nature without calling his own muscles
into play under the control of his own brain. As in the natural body head
and hand wait upon each other, so the labour-process unites the labour
of the hand with that of the head. Later on they part company and even
become deadly foes. The product ceases to be the direct product of the
individual, and becomes a social product, produced in common by a collective
labourer, i.e., by a combination of workmen, each of whom takes
only a part, greater or less, in the manipulation of the subject of their
labour. As the co-operative character of the labour-process becomes more
and more marked, so, as a necessary consequence, does our notion of productive
labour, and of its agent the productive labourer, become extended. In order
to labour productively, it is no longer necessary for you to do manual
work yourself; enough, if you are an organ of the collective labourer,
and perform one of its subordinate functions. The first definition given
above of productive labour, a definition deduced from the very nature of
the production of material objects, still remains correct for the collective
labourer, considered as a whole. But it no longer holds good for each member
taken individually.

On the other hand, however, our notion of productive labour becomes
narrowed. Capitalist production is not merely the production of commodities,
it is essentially the production of surplus-value. The labourer produces,
not for himself, but for capital. It no longer suffices, therefore, that
he should simply produce. He must produce surplus-value. That labourer
alone is productive, who produces surplus-value for the capitalist, and
thus works for the self-expansion of capital. If we may take an example
from outside the sphere of production of material objects, a schoolmaster
is a productive labourer when, in addition to belabouring the heads of
his scholars, he works like a horse to enrich the school proprietor. That
the latter has laid out his capital in a teaching factory, instead of in
a sausage factory, does not alter the relation. Hence the notion of a productive
labourer implies not merely a relation between work and useful effect,
between labourer and product of labour, but also a specific, social relation
of production, a relation that has sprung up historically and stamps the
labourer as the direct means of creating surplus-value. To be a productive
labourer is, therefore, not a piece of luck, but a misfortune. In Book
IV. which treats of the history of the theory, it will be more clearly
seen, that the production of surplus-value has at all times been made,
by classical political economists, the distinguishing characteristic of
the productive labourer. Hence their definition of a productive labourer
changes with their comprehension of the nature of surplus-value. Thus the
Physiocrats insist that only agricultural labour is productive, since that
alone, they say, yields a surplus-value. And they say so because, with
them, surplus-value has no existence except in the form of rent.

The prolongation of the working-day beyond the point at which
the labourer would have produced just an equivalent for the value of his
labour-power, and the appropriation of that surplus-labour by capital,
this is production of absolute surplus-value. It forms the general groundwork
of the capitalist system, and the starting-point for the production of
relative surplus-value. The latter presupposes that the working-day is
already divided into two parts, necessary labour, and surplus-labour. In
order to prolong the surplus-labour, the necessary labour is shortened
by methods whereby the equivalent for the wages is produced in less time.
The production of absolute surplus-value turns exclusively upon the length
of the working-day; the production of relative surplus-value, revolutionises
out and out the technical processes of labour, and the composition of society.
It therefore presupposes a specific mode, the capitalist mode of production,
a mode which, along with its methods, means, and conditions, arises and
develops itself spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal
subjection of labour to capital. In the course of this development, the
formal subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour to capital.

It will suffice merely to refer to certain intermediate forms,
in which surplus-labour is not extorted by direct compulsion from the producer,
nor the producer himself yet formally subjected to capital. In such forms
capital has not yet acquired the direct control of the labour-process.
By the side of independent producers who carry on their handicrafts and
agriculture in the traditional old-fashioned way, there stands the usurer
or the merchant, with his usurer&#8217;s capital or merchant&#8217;s capital, feeding
on them like a parasite. The predominance, in a society, of this form of
exploitation excludes the capitalist mode of production; to which mode,
however, this form may serve as a transition, as it did towards the close
of the Middle Ages. Finally, as is shown by modern &#8220;domestic industry,&#8221;
some intermediate forms are here and there reproduced in the background
of Modern Industry, though their physiognomy is totally changed.

If, on the one hand, the mere formal subjection of labour to capital
suffices for the production of absolute surplus-value, if, e.g.,
it is sufficient that handicraftsmen who previously worked on their own
account, or as apprentices of a master, should become wage labourers under
the direct control of a capitalist; so, on the other hand, we have seen,
how the methods of producing relative surplus-value, are, at the same time,
methods of producing absolute surplus-value. Nay, more, the excessive prolongation
of the working-day turned out to be the peculiar product of Modern Industry.
Generally speaking, the specifically capitalist mode of production ceases
to be a mere means of producing relative surplus-value, so soon as that
mode has conquered an entire branch of production; and still more so, so
soon as it has conquered all the important branches. It then becomes the
general, socially predominant form of production. As a special method of
producing relative surplus-value, it remains effective only, first, in
so far as it seizes upon industries that previously were only formally
subject to capital, that is, so far as it is propagandist; secondly, in
so far as the industries that have been taken over by it, continue to be
revolutionised by changes in the methods of production.

From one standpoint, any distinction between absolute and relative
surplus-value appears illusory. Relative surplus-value is absolute, since
it compels the absolute prolongation of the working-day beyond the labour-time
necessary to the existence of the labourer himself. Absolute surplus-value
is relative, since it makes necessary such a development of the productiveness
of labour, as will allow of the necessary labour-time being confined to
a portion of the working-day. But if we keep in mind the behaviour of surplus-value,
this appearance of identity vanishes. Once the capitalist mode of production
is established and become general, the difference between absolute and
relative surplus-value makes itself felt, whenever there is a question
of raising the rate of surplus-value. Assuming that labour-power is paid
for at its value, we are confronted by this alternative: given the productiveness
of labour and its normal intensity, the rate of surplus-value can be raised
only by the actual prolongation of the working-day; on the other hand,
given the length of the working-day, that rise can be effected only by
a change in the relative magnitudes of the components of the working-day,
viz., necessary labour and surplus-labour; a change which, if the wages
are not to fall below the value of labour-power, presupposes a change either
in the productiveness or in the intensity of the labour.

If the labourer wants all his time to produce the necessary means
of subsistence for himself and his race, he has no time left in which to
work gratis for others. Without a certain degree of productiveness in his
labour, he has no such superfluous time at his disposal; without such superfluous
time, no surplus-labour, and therefore no capitalists, no slave-owners,
no feudal lords, in one word, no class of large proprietors.[^1]

Thus we may say that surplus-value rests on a natural basis; but
this is permissible only in the very general sense, that there is no natural
obstacle absolutely preventing one man from disburdening himself of the
labour requisite for his own existence, and burdening another with it,
any more, for instance, than unconquerable natural obstacle prevent one
man from eating the flesh of another.[^2] No mystical
ideas must in any way be connected, as sometimes happens, with this historically
developed productiveness of labour. It is only after men have raised themselves
above the rank of animals, when therefore their labour has been to some
extent socialised, that a state of things arises in which the surplus-labour
of the one becomes a condition of existence for the other. At the dawn
of civilisation the productiveness acquired by labour is small, but so
too are the wants which develop with and by the means of satisfying them.
Further, at that early period, the portion of society that lives on the
labour of others is infinitely small compared with the mass of direct producers.
Along with the progress in the productiveness of labour, that small portion
of society increases both absolutely and relatively.[^3] Besides, capital with its accompanying relations springs up from an economic soil that is the product of a long process of development. The productiveness
of labour that serves as its foundation and starting-point, is a gift,
not of nature, but of a history embracing thousands of centuries.

Apart from the degree of development, greater or less, in the
form of social production, the productiveness of labour is fettered by
physical conditions. These are all referable to the constitution of man
himself (race, &amp;c.), and to surrounding nature. The external physical
conditions fall into two great economic classes, (1) Natural wealth in
means of subsistence, i.e., a fruitful soil, waters teeming with
fish, &amp;c., and (2), natural wealth in the instruments of labour, such
as waterfalls, navigable rivers, wood, metal, coal, &amp;c. At the dawn
of civilisation, it is the first class that turns the scale; at a higher
stage of development, it is the second. Compare, for example, England with
India, or in ancient times, Athens and Corinth with the shores of the Black
Sea.

The fewer the number of natural wants imperatively calling for
satisfaction, and the greater the natural fertility of the soil and the
favourableness of the climate, so much less is the labour-time necessary
for the maintenance and reproduction of the producer. So much greater therefore
can be the excess of his labours for others over his labour for himself.
Diodorus long ago remarked this in relation to the ancient Egyptians.

>&#8220;It is altogether incredible how little trouble and expense the bringing up
of their children causes them. They cook for them the first simple food
at hand; they also give them the lower part of the papyrus stem to eat,
so far as it can be roasted in the fire, and the roots and stalks of marsh
plants, some raw, some boiled and roasted. Most of the children go without
shoes and unclothed, for the air is so mild. Hence a child, until he is
grown up, costs his parents not more, on the whole, than twenty drachmas.
It is this, chiefly, which explains why the population of Egypt is so numerous,
and, therefore, why so many great works can be undertaken.&#8221;[^4]

Nevertheless the grand structures of ancient Egypt are less due to the
extent of its population than to the large proportion of it that was freely
disposable. Just as the individual labourer can do more surplus-labour
in proportion as his necessary labour-time is less, so with regard to the
working population. The smaller the part of it which is required for the
production of the necessary means of subsistence, so much the greater is
the part that can be set to do other work.

Capitalist production once assumed, then, all other circumstances
remaining the same, and given the length of the working day, the quantity
of surplus-labour will vary with the physical conditions of labour, especially
with the fertility of the soil. But it by no means follows from this that
the most fruitful soil is the most fitted for the growth of the capitalist
mode of production. This mode is based on the dominion of man over nature.
Where nature is too lavish, she &#8220;keeps him in hand, like a child in leading-strings.&#8221;
She does not impose upon him any necessity to develop himself.[^5] It is not the tropics with their luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate zone, that is the mother-country of capital. It is not the mere fertility of the soil, but the differentiation of the soil, the variety of its natural products, the changes of the seasons, which form the physical basis for the social division of labour, and which, by changes in the natural surroundings, spur man on to the multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, his means
and modes of labour. It is the necessity of bringing a natural force under
the control of society, of economising, of appropriating or subduing it
on a large scale by the work of man&#8217;s hand, that first plays the decisive
part in the history of industry. Examples are, the irrigation works in
Egypt,[^6] Lombardy, Holland, or in India and Persia
where irrigation by means of artificial canals, not only supplies the soil
with the water indispensable to it, but also carries down to it, in the
shape of sediment from the hills, mineral fertilisers. The secret of the
flourishing state of industry in Spain and Sicily under the dominion of
the Arabs lay in their irrigation works.[^7]

Favourable natural conditions alone, give us only the possibility,
never the reality, of surplus-labour, nor, consequently, of surplus-value
and a surplus-product. The result of difference in the natural conditions
of labour is this, that the same quantity of labour satisfies, in different
countries, a different mass of requirements,[^8] consequently, that under circumstances in other respects analogous, the necessary labour-time
is different. These conditions affect surplus-labour only as natural limits,
i.e., by fixing the points at which labour for others can begin.
In proportion as industry advances, these natural limits recede. In the
midst of our West European society, where the labourer purchases the right
to work for his own livelihood only by paying for it in surplus-labour,
the idea easily takes root that it is an inherent quality of human labour
to furnish a surplus-product. [^9] But consider, for example, an inhabitant of the eastern islands of the Asiatic Archipelago, where sago grows wild in the forests.

>&#8220;When the inhabitants have convinced themselves,
by boring a hole in the tree, that the pith is ripe, the trunk is cut down
and divided into several pieces, the pith is extracted, mixed with water
and filtered: it is then quite fit for use as sago. One tree commonly yields
300 lbs., and occasionally 500 to 600 lbs. There, then, people go into
the forests, and cut bread for themselves, just as with us they cut fire-wood.&#8221;[^10]

Suppose now such an eastern bread-cutter requires 12 working hours a week for the satisfaction of all his wants. Nature&#8217;s direct gift to him is plenty of leisure time. Before he can apply this leisure time productively for himself, a whole series of historical events is required; before he spends it in surplus-labour for strangers, compulsion is necessary. If capitalist production were introduced, the honest fellow
would perhaps have to work six days a week, in order to appropriate to
himself the product of one working day. The bounty of Nature does not explain
why he would then have to work 6 days a week, or why he must furnish 5
days of surplus-labour. It explains only why his necessary labour-time
would be limited to one day a week. But in no case would his surplus-product
arise from some occult quality inherent in human labour.

Thus, not only does the historically developed social productiveness
of labour, but also its natural productiveness, appear to be productiveness
of the capital with which that labour is incorporated.

Ricardo never concerns himself about the origin of surplus-value.
He treats it as a thing inherent in the capitalist mode of production,
which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of social production. Whenever
he discusses the productiveness of labour, he seeks in it, not the cause
of surplus-value, but the cause that determines the magnitude of that value.
On the other hand, his school has openly proclaimed the productiveness
of labour to be the originating cause of profit (read: Surplus-value).
This at all events is a progress as against the mercantilists who, on their
side, derived the excess of the price over the cost of production of the
product, from the act of exchange, from the product being sold above its
value. Nevertheless, Ricardo&#8217;s school simply shirked the problem, they
did not solve it. In fact these bourgeois economists instinctively saw,
and rightly so, that it is very dangerous to stir too deeply the burning
question of the origin of surplus-value. But what are we to think of John
Stuart Mill, who, half a century after Ricardo, solemnly claims superiority
over the mercantilists, by clumsily repeating the wretched evasions of
Ricardo&#8217;s earliest vulgarisers?

Mill says:

>&#8220;The cause of profit is that labour produces more than
is required for its support.&#8221;

So far, nothing but the old story; but Mill
wishing to add something of his own, proceeds:

>&#8220;To vary the form of the
theorem; the reason why capital yields a profit, is because food, clothing,
materials and tools, last longer than the time which was required to produce
them.&#8221;

He here confounds the duration of labour-time with the duration
of its products. According to this view, a baker whose product lasts only
a day, could never extract from his workpeople the same profit, as a machine
maker whose products endure for 20 years and more. Of course it is very
true, that if a bird&#8217;s nest did not last longer than the time it takes
in building, birds would have to do without nests.

This fundamental truth once established, Mill establishes his
own superiority over the mercantilists.

>&#8220;We thus see,&#8221; he proceeds, &#8220;that
profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the productive
power of labour; and the general profit of the country is always what the
productive power of labour makes it, whether any exchange takes place or
not. If there were no division of employments, there would be no buying
or selling, but there would still be profit.&#8221;

For Mill then, exchange,
buying and selling, those general conditions of capitalist production,
are but an incident, and there would always be profits even without the
purchase and sale of labour-power!

>&#8220;If,&#8221; he continues, &#8220;the labourers of the country collectively
produce twenty per cent more than their wages, profits will be twenty per
cent, whatever prices may or may not be.&#8221; This is, on the one hand, a rare
bit of tautology; for if labourers produce a surplus-value of 20% for the
capitalist, his profit will be to the total wages of the labourers as 20:100.
On the other hand, it is absolutely false to say that &#8220;profits will be
20%.&#8221; They will always be less, because they are calculated upon the sum
total of the capital advanced. If, for example, the capitalist have
advanced &pound;500, of which &pound;400 is laid out in means of production
and &pound;100 in wages, and if the rate of surplus-value be 20%, the rate
of profit will be 20:500, i.e., 4% and not 20%.

Then follows a splendid example of Mill&#8217;s method of handling the
different historical forms of social production.

>&#8220;I assume, throughout,
the state of things which, where the labourers and capitalists are separate
classes, prevails, with few exceptions, universally; namely, that the capitalist
advances the whole expenses, including the entire remuneration of the labourer.&#8221;

Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which as yet
exists only exceptionally on our earth.[^11] But let
us finish &#8212; Mill is willing to concede,

>&#8220;that he should do so is not a
matter of inherent necessity.&#8221; On the contrary: &#8220;the labourer might wait,
until the production is complete, for all that part of his wages which
exceeds mere necessaries: and even for the whole, if he has funds in hand
sufficient for his temporary support. But in the latter case, the labourer
is to that extent really a capitalist in the concern, by supplying a portion
of the funds necessary for carrying it on.&#8221;

Mill might have gone further
and have added, that the labourer who advances to himself not only the
necessaries of life but also the means of production, is in reality nothing
but his own wage-labourer. He might also have said that the American peasant
proprietor is but a serf who does enforced labour for himself instead of
for his lord.

After thus proving clearly, that even if capitalist production
had no existence, still it would always exist, Mill is consistent enough
to show, on the contrary, that it has no existence, even when it does exist.

>&#8220;And even in the former case&#8221; (when the workman is a wage labourer to whom
the capitalist advances all the necessaries of life, he the labourer), &#8220;may be looked upon in the same light,&#8221;
(i.e., as a capitalist), &#8220;since, contributing his labour at less than the market-price, (!) he may be regarded
as lending the difference (?) to his employer and receiving it back with
interest, &amp;c.&#8221;[^12]

In reality, the labourer advances his labour gratuitously to the capitalist during, say one week, in order to receive the market price at the end of the week, &amp;c., and it is
this which, according to Mill, transforms him into a capitalist. On the
level plain, simple mounds look like hills; and the imbecile flatness of
the present bourgeoisie is to be measured by the altitude of its great
intellects.

* * *

## Footnotes

[^1]: &#8220;The very existence of the master-capitalists, as a distinct class, is dependent on the productiveness of industry.&#8221; (Ramsay, l.c., p. 206.) &#8220;If each man&#8217;s labour were but enough to produce his own food, there could be no property.&#8221; (Ravenstone, l.c. p. 14, 15.)

[^2]: According to a recent calculation, there are yet at least 4,000,000 cannibals in those parts of the earth which have already been explored.

[^3]: &#8220;Among the wild Indians in America, almost everything is the labourer&#8217;s, 99 parts of a hundred are to be put upon the account of labour. In England, perhaps, the labourer has not 2/3.&#8221; (The Advantages of the East India Trade, &amp;c., p. 73.)

[^4]: Diodorus, l.c., l. I., c. 80.

[^5]: &#8220;The first (natural wealth) as it is most noble and advantageous, so doth it make the people careless, proud, and given to all excesses; whereas the second enforceth vigilancy, literature, arts and policy.&#8221; (England&#8217;s Treasure by Foreign Trade. Or the Balance of our Foreign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure. Written by Thomas Mun of London, merchant, and now published for the common good by his son John Mun. London, 1669, p. 181, 182.) &#8220;Nor can I conceive a greater curse upon a body of people, than to be thrown upon a spot of land, where the productions for subsistence and food were, in great measure, spontaneous, and the climate required or admitted little care for raiment and covering... there may be an extreme on the other side. A soil incapable of produce by labour is quite as bad as a soil that produces plentifully without any labour.&#8221; (An Inquiry into the Present High Price of Provisions. Lond. 1767, p. 10.)

[^6]: The necessity for predicting the rise and fall of the Nile created Egyptian astronomy, and with it the dominion of the priests, as directors of agriculture. &#8220;Le solstice est le moment de l&#8217;ann&eacute;e ou commence la crue du Nil, et celui que les Egyptiens ont du observer avec le plus d&#8217;attention.... C&#8217;&eacute;tait cette ann&eacute;e tropique qu&#8217;il leur importait de marquer pour se diriger dans leurs op&eacute;rations agricoles. Ils durent donc chercher dans le ciel un signe apparent de son retour.&#8221; [The solstice is the moment of the year when the Nile begins to rise, and it is the moment the Egyptians have had to watch for with the greatest attention ... It was the evolution of the tropical year which they had to establish firmly so as to conduct their agricultural operations in accordance with it. They therefore had to search the heavens for a visible sign of the solstice&#8217;s return.] (Cuvier: Discours sur les r&eacute;volutions du globe, ed. Hoefer, Paris, 1863, p. 141.)

[^7]: One of the material bases of the power of the state over the small disconnected producing organisms in India, was the regulation of the water supply. The Mahometan rulers of India understood this better than their English successors. It is enough to recall to mind the famine of 1866, which cost the lives of more than a million Hindus in the district of Orissa, in the Bengal presidency.

[^8]: &#8220;There are no two countries which furnish an equal number of the necessaries of life in equal plenty, and with the same quantity of labour. Men&#8217;s wants increase or diminish with the severity or temperateness of the climate they live in; consequently, the proportion of trade which the inhabitants of different countries are obliged to carry on through necessity cannot be the same, nor is it practicable to ascertain the degree of variation farther than by the degrees of Heat and Cold; from whence one may make this general conclusion, that the quantity of labour required for a certain number of people is greatest in cold climates, and least in hot ones; for in the former men not only want more clothes, but the earth more cultivating than in the latter.&#8221; (An Essay on the Governing Causes of the Natural Rate of Interest. Lond. 1750. p. 60.) The author of this epoch-making anonymous work is J. Massy. Hume took his theory of interest from it.

[^9]: &#8220;Chaque travail doit (this appears also to be part of the droits et devoirs du citoyen [rights and duties of the citizen]) laisser un exc&eacute;dent.&#8221; [All labour must leave a surplus] Proudhon.

[^10]: F. Schouw: &#8220;Die Erde, die Pflanze und der Mensch,&#8221; 2. Ed. Leipz. 1854, p. 148.

[^11]:

      In earlier editions of Capital the quotation from John Stuart Mill, &#8220;I assume throughout...of the labourer,&#8221; had been given incorrectly, the words &#8220;where the labourers and capitalists are separate classes&#8221; having been left out. Marx, in a letter dated November 28, 1878, pointed this out to Danielson, the Russian translator of Capital, adding: &#8220;The next two sentences, viz. &#8216;Strange optical illusion to see everywhere a state of things which as yet exists only exceptionally on our earth. But let us finish&#8217; - should be deleted and the following sentence substituted:

      >&#8220;Mr. Mill is good enough to believe that this state of things is not an absolute necessity, even in that economic system in which &#8216;labourers and capitalists are separate classes.&#8217;&#8221; The substance of this note has been taken from the Volksausgabe. The quotation from Mill is from his Principles of Political Economy, Book II, Chap XV, 5.

[^12]: J. St. Mill. Principles of Pol. Econ. Lond. 1868, p. 252-53 passim.
